hey folks on the last coffee centric
episode of basics we showed you the ins
and outs of how to brew the absolute
perfect cup of mud at home this week
thanks to a sponsorship from trade
coffee we're taking a deep dive into
coffees fussy high-strung Italian cousin
espresso whether served in an oversized
novelty mug with steamed milk foam
whipped cream and chocolate or greeting
you at the door wearing nothing but its
crema here's how you can enjoy this
hyper caffeinated cafe specialty in the
warm morning lights of your home kitchen
let's get down to basics
[Music]
so as I mentioned today's episode is
sponsored by trade coffee which is an
online subscription coffee service
they've got this really cool coffee
personalization quiz just answer a few
questions click a few pictures and you
get a selection of coffees customized to
your tastes preferences and brewing
methods the coffee is then literally
roasted to order before being shipped
fresh to your doorstep as you can see I
asked for some medium to dark breasts
whole bean coffee Zhai deal for espresso
and here they are which brings me to a
kind of an interesting point that you'll
see the only one of these is actually an
espresso roast and that's because you
don't necessarily need an espresso roast
to make espresso it's definitely a good
starting place but I've got a whole host
of beans here with different roast
levels and flavor profiles and just like
any brewing method there's plenty of
room for experimentation and figuring
out which one is right for you another
misconception is that espresso needs to
be made from super dark oily roasted
coffee beans like this or that darker
roast somehow have more caffeine in fact
the inverse is true
lighter roasts actually tend to be
slightly higher in caffeine and in the
end any one of these guys is gonna make
a mean cup of espresso now let's try
some out for the sake of consistency I'm
gonna go with this flying monkey from
Petey's coffee it's a medium dark
espresso roast with notes of milk
chocolate graham crackers and honey
sounds pretty good to me so first and
most importantly let's talk about the
grind any coffee nerd or barista worth
their beans is gonna tell you that you
gotta grind your beans fresh and
grinding your beans fresh for espresso
means making use of a conical burr
grinder because it's just not possible
to create a consistent grind using a
blade grinder this is a relatively
inexpensive one at about a hundred bucks
but you can get one that looks like a
pepper grinder for like 20 then it comes
down to what grind consistency is gonna
work best for your brewing method let's
start with maybe the most inexpensive
option the Moka pot this little guy that
makes a single shot of espresso is
available for about 20 bucks basically
you're just gonna unscrew the top
chamber brewing Deal here underneath
which you will find a little brooding
basket into which you're gonna place
your coffee just to fill it to the top
without pressing it down with a medium
to fine grind of coffee fill the chamber
below with hot water up to the valve
replace the filter basket over top screw
the brewing chamber on and you are ready
to rock now all this thing needs is a
little bit of heat simply place it on
you nope
that's that's not really gonna work is
it all right well I have not busted this
guy out in a while but it's time for
some vintage babish on to the induction
burner it goes over medium-high heat
normally you can leave the lid down but
I want you guys to be able to see what's
going on and within one to two minutes
the pressure and heat should build up in
the chamber below and press its way up
through the coffee brewing you a single
shot of espresso while it does not have
the distinctive crema floating atop the
coffee this to my knowledge is the least
expensive and most accessible way to
make a cup of espresso at home it's
relatively strong it's nice and clean
tasting but if you want to go a little
bit more coffee nerd it's time to get
into Aeropress territory which to make
espresso we just have to deviate from
the manufacturer's suggested brewing
instructions slightly changing the
brewing ratio to 20 grams of finely
ground coffee and 55 grams of nearly
boiling water about 205 degrees
Fahrenheit again no distinctive layer of
crema atop the coffee but it's still a
halfway decent shot of espresso but what
if you want to make the real deal
without spending hundreds if not
thousands of dollars in a complex
machine well allow me to introduce you
to the manual press this one's called
the flair it's available for around 140
bucks and it's a great illustration of
how espresso is made with heat and
pressure it's also a great example of
how important grind size is and why you
can't use a blade grinder instead of a
conical burr because not only do we need
the grinds to be consistent we need them
to be a very specific size example
number one coffee that is ground to
coarse all the extra space between the
grinds lets the water pass through too
quickly leaving you with a semi strong
cup of coffee instead of espresso you
can see it's got a little bit of foam on
top but not the pumpkin orange crema
that we're after for that we need to
grind our coffee a little finer but not
too fine too little space between the
grains makes it almost impossible to
press the coffee through and you'll
break your machine before pulling a
single decent shot as you can see it's
got the crema that we're looking for but
not quite enough coffee for that we need
the Goldilocks situation this is gonna
depend entirely upon your grinder and
it's just gonna be a matter of trial and
error with your machine until you find
the sweet spot for me it's 16 grams of
coffee ground between levels one and two
on my grinder tamped with about 20
pounds of force filling up the cylinder
with 60 milliliters of 200 degree
fahrenheit water yes I know I just mixed
metric and imperial of
sorry and extracted with about 35 pounds
of force how do you know how much
pressure you're putting on the machine
well it's a little bootleg but you can
use a bathroom scale you should be
pressing down in there pretty hard
without putting your full body weight
into it and the extraction should take
about 35 seconds a good espresso shot
you'll notice we'll separate into three
parts initially a thick creamy crema and
a saunter II mysterious dark orange body
below that that slowly disappears into
the crema and the deep chocolatey Brown
coffee underneath it all I know this
seems awfully fussy but espresso is an
awfully fussy drink and there's only one
way to make it the right way and once
you've made it the right way you can
make all different kinds of things out
of it let's start with maybe the easiest
one espresso Romano which is really just
a shot of espresso served with a little
squeeze of lemon and a lemon wedge I
know this seems pretty simplistic but
it's actually a really nice
that said it obviously does increase the
acidity of the coffee a great deal I
never really take sugar in my coffee but
a little half teaspoon in this case goes
a long way and now maybe even easier the
cafe americano
which is really just an approximation of
American style drip coffee by adding hot
water to a double shot of espresso this
is largely believed to have originated
during World War Two in American GIs
would watered-down espresso to get that
familiar taste of home but this is not
confirmed now to make most other
espresso drinks we need two things milk
and steam
now usually steam ones like this one are
attached to relatively expensive
machines and unless you spend a whole
lot of money they don't work very well
there's sputter E and slow to start and
they're perfectly good for foaming milk
but not so good for getting micro
bubbles that you might want for
something like a latte a much less
expensive at-home option is an automatic
milk frother these guys have pretty set
it and forget it add some milk hit the
button and in a few minutes you will
have some nice hot foamy milk with an
emphasis on foam this machine produces a
lot of foam and not that much steamed
milk which is great for some drinks like
cappuccinos but not so great for others
an even better option that you probably
already have kicking around the house is
a French press simply heat your milk to
145 degrees Fahrenheit pour it into your
French press and froth it using the
metal filter by just sort of jamming it
up and down a few times this when done
with restraint produces steamed milk and
foam that much more closely resembles
what you get with the steam wand than
most other at home
Solutions the last step here is to swirl
it tap it on the counter and let it rest
for about 30 seconds this gets rid of
any larger bubbles and makes the foam
nice and glossy alright so we got our
steamed milk Matt but we make some
drinks with it I'm sure I'm gonna get a
few things wrong here but tell me
exactly how I'm wrong in the comments
let's start with a cappuccino which is a
double shot of espresso and equal parts
steamed milk and very frothy foam we're
gonna start by pouring from up high
which allows the steamed milk to mix
with the coffee and then move closer as
we get to the foam which allows it to
settle on top you can see that the foam
is pretty thick and forms a clearly
defined layer on top of the coffee now
the big difference between a cappuccino
and a latte is that a lot say has more
steamed milk and a more finely textured
foam same deal pour from a bond high and
then get down low once you've reached
the foam if you were looking for lot say
alright you came to the wrong channel I
am NOT that talented nor graceful the
foam should be very light and creamy and
not too bubbly and frothy as you can see
it's a much less defined layer than with
the cappuccino
next up we're doing a cafe mocha we're
gonna start with a double shot of
espresso and add to it an equal amount
of chocolate sauce then from there right
now it's kind of the same deal as a lot
a whole lot of steamed milk a little bit
of foam and we're practically eating
dessert at this point so we might as
well top it up with some whipped cream
cocoa powder chocolate drizzle cinnamon
stick big chunk a birthday cake I don't
know okay I'm talking trash but this is
obviously delicious just don't tell
anybody I said so and maybe serve this
with a little cookie or something
instead of a cinnamon stick next up we
have a Cortado which is a single shot of
espresso to which we're going to add an
equal amount or more steamed milk on top
with a little dollop of foam easy peasy
and even easier is the macchiato or a
double shot of espresso with a big dot
of foam on top yes this is a macchiato
now what Starbucks has led you to
believe is a macchiato last but not
least if we really want to eat our
coffee we have to serve it over ice
cream in what is otherwise known as an
affogato a single scoop or in my case a
couple tiny scoops of vanilla ice cream
topped with a double shot of espresso
cold and hot sweet and bitter this is a
simple and lovely Italian dessert for
the ages and for any time of year I know
it's not really an espresso beverage per
se but I was running out of ideas I just
wanna say thanks again to trade coffee
for sponsoring this episode the first
100 people that use the link in this
video's description or enter code babish
at checkout will get 30% off their first
match and never pay shipping trade has a
massive
amount of high-quality coffees roasted
to order customize to your preferences
and continually evolving to suit your
tastes it only takes a minute to take
their coffee quiz online and get matched
with the Roasters and beans that best
suit your brewing practices it's fresh
it's convenient it's personalized and it
is the best price for the best quality
coffee you're gonna find anywhere I hope
you guys give it a try for yourselves
tell them Bab Sencha and get to brewing
the best coffee you've ever had today
[Music]